README.md, before:

# Chefling DI for Java

Chefling is a minimal dependency injection container written in pure Java. It does not rely on
annotations, only does constructor injection and has limited (but powerful) configuration options.

Chefling requires at minimum Java 7.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/cookingfox/chefling-di-java.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/cookingfox/chefling-di-java)

## Download

[![Download](https://api.bintray.com/packages/cookingfox/maven/chefling-di-java/images/download.svg)](https://bintray.com/cookingfox/maven/chefling-di-java/_latestVersion)
[![Maven Central](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.cookingfox/chefling-di-java/badge.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.cookingfox/chefling-di-java)

The distribution is hosted on [Bintray](https://bintray.com/cookingfox/maven/chefling-di-java/view).
To include the package in your projects, you can add the jCenter repository.

### Gradle

Add jCenter to your `repositories` block:

```groovy
repositories {
    jcenter()
}
```

and add the project to the `dependencies` block in your `build.gradle`:

```groovy
dependencies {
    compile 'com.cookingfox:chefling-di-java:6.0.1'
}
```

### Maven

Add jCenter to your repositories in `pom.xml` or `settings.xml`:

```xml
<repositories>
    <repository>
        <id>jcenter</id>
        <url>http://jcenter.bintray.com</url>
    </repository>
</repositories>
```

and add the project declaration to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.cookingfox</groupId>
    <artifactId>chefling-di-java</artifactId>
    <version>6.0.1</version>
</dependency>
```

## Features

- Dependency injection without annotations: keeps your code clean.
- Automatic resolving of dependencies using reflection and constructor injection.
- [Lifecycle](#lifecycle) hooks for the creation and destruction phases.
- [Builder](#builder) to control configuration and initialization order.
- [Modular container configurations](#Modular-container-configurations) support through composite
containers.

## Usage

### Create a Chefling container

The easiest way to create a Chefling container is by doing:

```java
CheflingContainer container = Chefling.createContainer();
```

This provides you with an instance of the default container implementation.

It is also possible to use the designated Builder class:

```java
CheflingContainer container = Chefling.builder().addConfig(/* (omitted) */).buildContainer();
```

See [Builder](#builder) for more information. Also see
[Modular container configurations](#Modular-container-configurations) for instructions on how to
create and add container child configurations.

### Ask for an instance of a type: `getInstance(type)` and `createInstance(type)`

There are two ways to have Chefling provide you with an instance of a type (class / interface):

- `CheflingContainer#getInstance(type)`: returns a stored instance of the type, or creates and 
stores a new instance, using:

- `CheflingContainer#createInstance(type)`: always creates a new instance that is NOT stored. This 
method should only be called directly when you are absolutely sure you need a new instance, which is 
usually not the case.

When `CheflingContainer#createInstance(type)` is called, Chefling attempts to resolve all 
dependencies (constructor arguments) of the provided type. See the
[F.A.Q.](#can-i-use-all-different-kinds-of-java-types-with-the-container) for information on which 
types can and can not be resolved by Chefling. If the type implements the `CheflingLifecycle` 
interface, its `initialize()` method will be called by the `createInstance(type)` method. See 
[Lifecycle](#lifecycle) for more information.

### Configure the container: `map*()` methods

You can configure the container, so that when you ask for a type, the container provides you with a
specific instance or implementation.

#### Use a specific instance: `mapInstance(type, instance)`

Mapping a specific instance of a type is useful when it has dependencies on unresolvable types, such
as `String` or `Boolean`:

```java
// provide the specific instance
container.mapInstance(MyClass.class, new MyClass("some value", true));

// `resolved` is the provided instance
MyClass resolved = container.getInstance(MyClass.class);
```

#### Use a specific implementation: `mapType(type, subType)`

Chefling can not create an instance of an interface or abstract class, so you will need to define 
which implementation you want to use:

```java
// map the interface to a specific implementation
container.mapType(MyInterface.class, MyImplementation.class);

// `resolved` is an instance of MyImplementation
MyInterface resolved = container.getInstance(MyInterface.class);
```

#### Use a factory: `mapFactory(type, factory)`

If a type has dependencies that are both resolvable and unresolvable, you can map a 
`CheflingFactory` implementation:

```java
// map the type to a factory
container.mapFactory(MyInterface.class, new CheflingFactory<MyInterface>() {
    @Override
    public MyInterface createInstance(CheflingContainer container) {
        return new MyImplementation("some value", container.getInstance(OtherType.class));
    }
});

// `resolved` is the result of the Factory method
MyInterface resolved = container.getInstance(MyInterface.class);
```

If the `Factory` returns null or something that is not an instance of the expected type, an 
exception will be thrown.

### Lifecycle

The [`CheflingLifecycle` interface](src/main/java/com/cookingfox/chefling/api/CheflingLifecycle.java)
allows implementing classes to hook into the lifecycle processes of the container:

- When `CheflingContainer#createInstance(type)` is called and an instance of the requested type is 
created, it will call the `CheflingLifecycle#initialize()` method. This will also happen for types 
that have been mapped using the `map...` methods, even `mapInstance()`. For example, if a type `Foo` 
is mapped to a specific instance of the class, and it implements the `CheflingLifecycle` interface, 
then its `initialize()` method will be called.

- The `CheflingContainer#removeInstanceAndMapping()` and `CheflingContainer#resetContainer()` 
methods will call the `CheflingLifecycle#dispose()` method of instances that implement the 
`CheflingLifecycle` interface.

### Builder

As your application grows, the Chefling container configuration grows as well. You'll start 
noticing different types of configuration, such as libraries, your application domain and the 
initialization of the application. The `CheflingBuilder` allows you to modularize your Chefling
configuration into `CheflingConfig` instances:

```java
CheflingConfig libraryConfig = new CheflingConfig() {
    @Override
    public void apply(CheflingContainer container) {
        // configure container with library dependencies
        container.mapType(IMyLib.class, MyLibImpl.class);
    }
};

CheflingConfig initAppConfig = new CheflingConfig() {
    @Override
    public void apply(CheflingContainer container) {
        // initialize application components
        container.getInstance(MyViewController.class);
    }
};

CheflingContainer container = new Chefling.Builder()
    .addConfig(libraryConfig)
    .addConfig(initAppConfig)
    .buildContainer();
```

The `CheflingContainer` applies the `CheflingConfig` instances in the order they were added. Of
course, you can define your own classes that implement this interface for the desired level of
modularity.

### Modular container configurations

Chefling supports modularizing container configurations through a composite pattern:

```java
// example module configuration
CheflingContainer moduleContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
moduleContainer.mapType(IModule.class, ModuleImplementation.class);

// other container configuration
CheflingContainer appContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
appContainer.mapType(IApp.class, AppImpl.class);

// add module configuration to app container
appContainer.addChildContainer(moduleContainer);
```

This means that when the `appContainer` asks for `IModule`, it will receive a `ModuleImplementation`
instance.

Note that when a child container is added which contains a mapping or instance for a type that is
already present in the container it is added to, an exception will be thrown:

```java
CheflingContainer moduleContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
moduleContainer.mapType(IModule.class, ModuleImplementation.class);

// container configuration with same mapping
CheflingContainer appContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
appContainer.mapType(IModule.class, OtherModuleImplementation.class);

// exception: mapping for "IModule" already exists
appContainer.addChildContainer(moduleContainer);
```

It is also possible to do the inverse: set the parent of a container, using
`setParentContainer(CheflingContainer)`.

There's a helper method available for creating a child container and adding it immediately:
`createChildContainer()`.

### Validating the configuration

Since dependencies are resolved at runtime, it can be useful to make sure your configuration is 
correct during the development phase. To have Chefling resolve all mappings, use the 
`CheflingContainer#validateContainer()` method. This will bring any configuration issues to light.
Note that resolving the full object graph is an expensive operation, so it should only be used
during development.

__WARNING: Make sure to remove this call for production builds!__

## F.A.Q.

#### _Can I use all different kinds of Java types with the container?_

No, the following types are not allowed:

- Classes in the `java.*` and `javax.*` packages: these are considered Java language constructs. 
Examples: `java.lang.String`, `java.lang.Exception`, `java.util.LinkedList`.
- Classes that are not public.
- Primitive types (e.g. `boolean`, `int`).
- Exceptions (or anything which extends `Throwable`).
- `enum` types.
- Annotations.
- Non-static member ("inner") classes.
- Anonymous classes.

These types are not allowed because the container would not know how to resolve them automatically.
Either because there is no logical default (e.g. `boolean`, `String`), or because no instance can
be created of the type (e.g. `enum`, annotation).

#### _Java supports multiple constructors. How does Chefling decide which one to use?_

The `createInstance()` method walks through all constructors and picks one when either:

- The constructor has no parameters. It makes it the most reasonable default.
- All constructor parameters are resolvable by the container. (see question above)

If no 'default' constructor can be picked, an exception will be thrown. This will also be the case
if the class has no `public` constructors.

#### _Does Chefling detect circular dependencies?_

Yes, an exception will be thrown. The only proper way of handling circular dependencies is to change
one of the classes, for example by introducing a setter method.

#### _Is Chefling able to solve the "robot legs" problem?_

The robot legs problem describes how two classes can depend on the same type, but 
expect a different instance of that type to be injected:

```java
interface IFoot {}

class LeftFoot implements IFoot {}

class RightFoot implements IFoot {}

class LeftLeg {
    IFoot leftFoot;

    LeftLeg (IFoot leftFoot) {
        // expects an instance of LeftFoot
        this.leftFoot = leftFoot;
    }
}

class RightLeg {
    IFoot rightFoot;

    RightLeg (IFoot rightFoot) {
        // expects an instance of RightFoot
        this.rightFoot = rightFoot;
    }
}
```

To have a dependency injection container resolve the expected dependencies, it would need to know 
which specific instance to inject, per class. This would be possible by:

- Having the ability to configure the class dependencies per constructor parameter.
- Using metadata (e.g. an `@Inject` annotation) to define which type should be injected.

Chefling does not and will not have these features. Its philosophy is to be concise and apply
convention over configuration.

#### _Why "Chefling"?_

We used cooking as an analogy for dependency injection (we're Cooking Fox after all): when asking a
chef to prepare a meal, he/she prepares all the necessary ingredients and uses these to cook the
dish. This is basically what a DI container does: ask for an instance of a class and it will create
one, resolving its dependencies. The word "Chefling" suggests a 'small' chef, which corresponds to
the limited functionality and scope of this library.

## Copyright and license

Code and documentation copyright 2016 Cooking Fox. Code released under the Apache 2.0 license.

Commit message:

Updates README with javadoc.io URL

README.md, after:

# Chefling DI for Java

Chefling is a minimal dependency injection container written in pure Java. It does not rely on
annotations, only does constructor injection and has limited (but powerful) configuration options.

Chefling requires at minimum Java 7.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/cookingfox/chefling-di-java.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/cookingfox/chefling-di-java)

## Download

[![Download](https://api.bintray.com/packages/cookingfox/maven/chefling-di-java/images/download.svg)](https://bintray.com/cookingfox/maven/chefling-di-java/_latestVersion)
[![Maven Central](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.cookingfox/chefling-di-java/badge.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.cookingfox/chefling-di-java)

The distribution is hosted on [Bintray](https://bintray.com/cookingfox/maven/chefling-di-java/view).
To include the package in your projects, you can add the jCenter repository.

### Gradle

Add jCenter to your `repositories` block:

```groovy
repositories {
    jcenter()
}
```

and add the project to the `dependencies` block in your `build.gradle`:

```groovy
dependencies {
    compile 'com.cookingfox:chefling-di-java:6.0.1'
}
```

### Maven

Add jCenter to your repositories in `pom.xml` or `settings.xml`:

```xml
<repositories>
    <repository>
        <id>jcenter</id>
        <url>http://jcenter.bintray.com</url>
    </repository>
</repositories>
```

and add the project declaration to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.cookingfox</groupId>
    <artifactId>chefling-di-java</artifactId>
    <version>6.0.1</version>
</dependency>
```

## Features

- Dependency injection without annotations: keeps your code clean.
- Automatic resolving of dependencies using reflection and constructor injection.
- [Lifecycle](#lifecycle) hooks for the creation and destruction phases.
- [Builder](#builder) to control configuration and initialization order.
- [Modular container configurations](#Modular-container-configurations) support through composite
containers.

## Usage

You can find the JavaDoc on
[javadoc.io](http://www.javadoc.io/doc/com.cookingfox/chefling-di-java/6.0.1).

### Create a Chefling container

The easiest way to create a
[`CheflingContainer`](src/main/java/com/cookingfox/chefling/api/CheflingContainer.java) is by doing:

```java
CheflingContainer container = Chefling.createContainer();
```

This provides you with an instance of the default container implementation.

It is also possible to use the designated Builder class:

```java
CheflingContainer container = Chefling.builder().addConfig(/* (omitted) */).buildContainer();
```

See [Builder](#builder) for more information. Also see
[Modular container configurations](#Modular-container-configurations) for instructions on how to
create and add container child configurations.

### Ask for an instance of a type: `getInstance(type)` and `createInstance(type)`

There are two ways to have Chefling provide you with an instance of a type (class / interface):

- `CheflingContainer#getInstance(type)`: returns a stored instance of the type, or creates and 
stores a new instance, using:

- `CheflingContainer#createInstance(type)`: always creates a new instance that is NOT stored. This 
method should only be called directly when you are absolutely sure you need a new instance, which is 
usually not the case.

When `CheflingContainer#createInstance(type)` is called, Chefling attempts to resolve all 
dependencies (constructor arguments) of the provided type. See the
[F.A.Q.](#can-i-use-all-different-kinds-of-java-types-with-the-container) for information on which 
types can and can not be resolved by Chefling. If the type implements the `CheflingLifecycle` 
interface, its `initialize()` method will be called by the `createInstance(type)` method. See 
[Lifecycle](#lifecycle) for more information.

### Configure the container: `map*()` methods

You can configure the container, so that when you ask for a type, the container provides you with a
specific instance or implementation.

#### Use a specific instance: `mapInstance(type, instance)`

Mapping a specific instance of a type is useful when it has dependencies on unresolvable types, such
as `String` or `Boolean`:

```java
// provide the specific instance
container.mapInstance(MyClass.class, new MyClass("some value", true));

// `resolved` is the provided instance
MyClass resolved = container.getInstance(MyClass.class);
```

#### Use a specific implementation: `mapType(type, subType)`

Chefling can not create an instance of an interface or abstract class, so you will need to define 
which implementation you want to use:

```java
// map the interface to a specific implementation
container.mapType(MyInterface.class, MyImplementation.class);

// `resolved` is an instance of MyImplementation
MyInterface resolved = container.getInstance(MyInterface.class);
```

#### Use a factory: `mapFactory(type, factory)`

If a type has dependencies that are both resolvable and unresolvable, you can map a 
[`CheflingFactory`](src/main/java/com/cookingfox/chefling/api/CheflingFactory.java) implementation:

```java
// map the type to a factory
container.mapFactory(MyInterface.class, new CheflingFactory<MyInterface>() {
    @Override
    public MyInterface createInstance(CheflingContainer container) {
        return new MyImplementation("some value", container.getInstance(OtherType.class));
    }
});

// `resolved` is the result of the Factory method
MyInterface resolved = container.getInstance(MyInterface.class);
```

If the `Factory` returns null or something that is not an instance of the expected type, an 
exception will be thrown.

### Lifecycle

The [`CheflingLifecycle` interface](src/main/java/com/cookingfox/chefling/api/CheflingLifecycle.java)
allows implementing classes to hook into the lifecycle processes of the container:

- When `CheflingContainer#createInstance(type)` is called and an instance of the requested type is 
created, it will call the `CheflingLifecycle#initialize()` method. This will also happen for types 
that have been mapped using the `map...` methods, even `mapInstance()`. For example, if a type `Foo` 
is mapped to a specific instance of the class, and it implements the `CheflingLifecycle` interface, 
then its `initialize()` method will be called.

- The `CheflingContainer#removeInstanceAndMapping()` and `CheflingContainer#resetContainer()` 
methods will call the `CheflingLifecycle#dispose()` method of instances that implement the 
`CheflingLifecycle` interface.

### Builder

As your application grows, the Chefling container configuration grows as well. You'll start 
noticing different types of configuration, such as libraries, your application domain and the 
initialization of the application. The
[`CheflingBuilder`](src/main/java/com/cookingfox/chefling/api/CheflingBuilder.java) allows you to
modularize your Chefling configuration into `CheflingConfig` instances:

```java
CheflingConfig libraryConfig = new CheflingConfig() {
    @Override
    public void apply(CheflingContainer container) {
        // configure container with library dependencies
        container.mapType(IMyLib.class, MyLibImpl.class);
    }
};

CheflingConfig initAppConfig = new CheflingConfig() {
    @Override
    public void apply(CheflingContainer container) {
        // initialize application components
        container.getInstance(MyViewController.class);
    }
};

CheflingContainer container = new Chefling.Builder()
    .addConfig(libraryConfig)
    .addConfig(initAppConfig)
    .buildContainer();
```

The `CheflingContainer` applies the `CheflingConfig` instances in the order they were added. Of
course, you can define your own classes that implement this interface for the desired level of
modularity.

### Modular container configurations

Chefling supports modularizing container configurations through a composite pattern:

```java
// example module configuration
CheflingContainer moduleContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
moduleContainer.mapType(IModule.class, ModuleImplementation.class);

// other container configuration
CheflingContainer appContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
appContainer.mapType(IApp.class, AppImpl.class);

// add module configuration to app container
appContainer.addChildContainer(moduleContainer);
```

This means that when the `appContainer` asks for `IModule`, it will receive a `ModuleImplementation`
instance.

Note that when a child container is added which contains a mapping or instance for a type that is
already present in the container it is added to, an exception will be thrown:

```java
CheflingContainer moduleContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
moduleContainer.mapType(IModule.class, ModuleImplementation.class);

// container configuration with same mapping
CheflingContainer appContainer = Chefling.createContainer();
appContainer.mapType(IModule.class, OtherModuleImplementation.class);

// exception: mapping for "IModule" already exists
appContainer.addChildContainer(moduleContainer);
```

It is also possible to do the inverse: set the parent of a container, using
`setParentContainer(CheflingContainer)`.

There's a helper method available for creating a child container and adding it immediately:
`createChildContainer()`.

### Validating the configuration

Since dependencies are resolved at runtime, it can be useful to make sure your configuration is 
correct during the development phase. To have Chefling resolve all mappings, use the 
`CheflingContainer#validateContainer()` method. This will bring any configuration issues to light.
Note that resolving the full object graph is an expensive operation, so it should only be used
during development.

__WARNING: Make sure to remove this call for production builds!__

## F.A.Q.

#### _Can I use all different kinds of Java types with the container?_

No, the following types are not allowed:

- Classes in the `java.*` and `javax.*` packages: these are considered Java language constructs. 
Examples: `java.lang.String`, `java.lang.Exception`, `java.util.LinkedList`.
- Classes that are not public.
- Primitive types (e.g. `boolean`, `int`).
- Exceptions (or anything which extends `Throwable`).
- `enum` types.
- Annotations.
- Non-static member ("inner") classes.
- Anonymous classes.

These types are not allowed because the container would not know how to resolve them automatically.
Either because there is no logical default (e.g. `boolean`, `String`), or because no instance can
be created of the type (e.g. `enum`, annotation).

#### _Java supports multiple constructors. How does Chefling decide which one to use?_

The `createInstance()` method walks through all constructors and picks one when either:

- The constructor has no parameters. It makes it the most reasonable default.
- All constructor parameters are resolvable by the container. (see question above)

If no 'default' constructor can be picked, an exception will be thrown. This will also be the case
if the class has no `public` constructors.

#### _Does Chefling detect circular dependencies?_

Yes, an exception will be thrown. The only proper way of handling circular dependencies is to change
one of the classes, for example by introducing a setter method.

#### _Is Chefling able to solve the "robot legs" problem?_

The robot legs problem describes how two classes can depend on the same type, but 
expect a different instance of that type to be injected:

```java
interface IFoot {}

class LeftFoot implements IFoot {}

class RightFoot implements IFoot {}

class LeftLeg {
    IFoot leftFoot;

    LeftLeg (IFoot leftFoot) {
        // expects an instance of LeftFoot
        this.leftFoot = leftFoot;
    }
}

class RightLeg {
    IFoot rightFoot;

    RightLeg (IFoot rightFoot) {
        // expects an instance of RightFoot
        this.rightFoot = rightFoot;
    }
}
```

To have a dependency injection container resolve the expected dependencies, it would need to know 
which specific instance to inject, per class. This would be possible by:

- Having the ability to configure the class dependencies per constructor parameter.
- Using metadata (e.g. an `@Inject` annotation) to define which type should be injected.

Chefling does not and will not have these features. Its philosophy is to be concise and apply
convention over configuration.

#### _Why "Chefling"?_

We used cooking as an analogy for dependency injection (we're Cooking Fox after all): when asking a
chef to prepare a meal, he/she prepares all the necessary ingredients and uses these to cook the
dish. This is basically what a DI container does: ask for an instance of a class and it will create
one, resolving its dependencies. The word "Chefling" suggests a 'small' chef, which corresponds to
the limited functionality and scope of this library.

## Copyright and license

Code and documentation copyright 2016 Cooking Fox. Code released under the Apache 2.0 license.
